---
title: "The intertwined histories of computer science and neuroscience"
categories:
  - neuroscience
tags:
  - Turing
  - von Neumann
  - computer science
use_math: false
published: True
---

Computational neuroscience is the study of the function of nervous systems and brains, both using computers as tools to simulate that which cannot be modeled otherwise and using metaphors of computation [Churchland1987a]. In the latter sense Marr's now famous tri-level analysis provides a foundational framework. Marr proposed that a given neural circuit can be analysed at three levels: we can first ask what computation is being performed, second what is the algorithm used to perform the computation, and third what is the physical implementation of this algorithm[Marr]. Marr's framework inspired many founders of the field, including Hopfield, Sejnowski, and Poggio. However, antecedents to this connection between brains, minds and computers can be identified long before Marr. 

Starting with Frege, Boole and arguably, though less significantly, Leibniz, there has been a strong desire for formal systems capable of expressing thought and for formal rules of reasoning.Frege's Begriffsschrift and Leibniz's calculus ratiocinator, for instance. The desire to make mathematical reasoning a purely algorithmic, or formal, process lead ultimately to Hilbert's formalist program, and to Turing's formulation of an ideal, mechanical, rule-following computer. Though ultimately Turing's universal machines were physically realized as actual computing devices, originally they were devised purely as theoretical tools, models of mechanical reasoning to be used in proofs of statements in metamathematics [Turing1936]. It is helpful to note that in the 1930s a computer referred to a person performing calculations, and that Turing's original paper described a machine having a finite number of `states of mind' -- finite due to our own limited mental capacities. Starting with McCulloch and Pitts [McCulloch1990a], Turing machines were envisioned as a kind of model of the mind. Indeed, his eponymous machines provided the basis for early functionalist philosophies of mind[Putnam1960], and they still provide the basis for contemporary theories in cognitive science -- the dominant view being that cognition is a type of computation (cite something). Turing maintained a strong interest in the relation between computers and the mind throughout his life[Turing1950]. 

Conversely, the other key figure in the founding of computer science, John von Neumann, also held a deep interest in the brain. In the 1940s, as part of Weiner's cybernetics school, von Neumann engaged in much discussion about the relation between humans and machines, which lead to the brain being used very loosely as a model for the computers he was involved in designing. Von Neumann's `First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC', still the template for most computers in use today, makes reference to `organs' of the computer, and discusses similarities and differences between the logical units of transistors and neurons[VonNeumann1945a]. Later von Neumann, realizing the immense structural and functional complexity of the brain, moved away from thinking of modeling the brain so literally with a computer, and instead advocated using computers to numerically simulate some elements of the brain's function [Asaro2011, vonNeumann1958]. Though a gross charicature of their views, Turing and von Neumann serve to neatly represent the two elements of the brain-computer relation that computational neuroscience explores today -- computers as models for cognitive processes and computers as tools to simulate the brain. Given the founders of computer science were so interested in the brain, it is no surprise that we now find computers and brains intimately related [Asaro2011].

In some ways cognitive science is best defined in contrast to the behavorism that it replaced. Cognitive science admits the existence of mental states and representations, while behavorism does not. The notion of representation is closely related to that of computation. For instance in order to say that a physical system implements a given computation, there must be some elements of that system that map usefully to the variables being computed, either the inputs, outputs, or some internal variables [Churchland1987a]. The existence of such a mapping provides the basis for claiming that a system represents a quantity of interest, and it is the manipulation of these representations that are the basis of computation. Indeed the tagline for philosopher Jerry Fodor's book The Language of Thought was “No computation without representation.”[Fodor1975] In cognitive science, representations are often at quite a high level -- elements of a particular thought process, for instance. While computational neuroscience focuses on lower level computations and representations and how they are implemented in a neural system -- object recognition in the visual system, for instance. 

Of course, the issues described here are more complicated than this introduction does any kind of justice, and have been much debated -- see Piccinini and Shagrir 2014 for an overview [Piccinini2014]. While contemporary theories in cognitive science are shifting from a traditional computational framework to so-called embodied, or embedded, theories (e.g. predictive processing, à la Clark 2016 [Clark2016]). Regardless, a canonical problem in computational neuroscience is in characterizing representations within the nervous system. How are elements of the world, internal processes, and motor responses encoded in neural activity? Which aspects are encoded? Such questions are most straight forward in sensory systems, where it is clear we are looking for representations of elements of the external environment. Until recently, individual neurons have been viewed as the functional units of study -- part of the neuron doctrine first proposed by Cajal in the late 19th century [Yuste2015b]. The receptive field of neurons in the visual system continues to provide the archetype [Martin1994a]. Hubel and Weisel were the first to characterize this relationship for individual visual cortical neurons in the cat [Hubel1959]. Other senses can similarly be studied and encoding relationship identified (cite auditory, olfactory, somatosensory papers). A significant amount of work has since been devoted to the identification of encoding relationships of individual neurons -- refer to Aljadeff et al 2016 for an overview[Aljadeff2016]. 
